+++
date = '2025-09-01T15:11:38+05:30'
draft = false
title = 'On watching Chungking Express: Understanding the Melody of Eyes'
section = 'posts'

author = 'reverist dark moth'
description = 'Sunday ritual of watching a movie'
+++

Well, I just want to throw my hands in the air and dance to “California Dreamin” like Faye, too. The swaying of her hands and hips makes this cult classic so impressionable. The critics think the director Wong is a genius, and maybe he is. This movie does seem like an ode to the monotony and cruelty of city life; cramped spaces, narrow lanes with kittens, and relentless killings. The surroundings are unforgiving and rather tasteless. However, unlike its wikipedia synopsis, I do not think Zhiwu (Takeshi Kanashiro) is a police man, he is rather a poet – A romantic poet, heartbroken and yearning, searching for a cure for his broken heart, he says these profound, poignant lines where even the passwords he set to important portals are romantic; the canned sardines and pineapples somehow become a testament to his heartbreak. He is all of us when he hopes for a reconciliation because “love expires in a month”, holding onto that last shred of hope, making sense of senseless things. There is a character he meets after vowing to fall in love with the first woman who walks through the door of the bar he is drinking at; she walks in, a drug dealer who shoots people when things go wrong, who wears a blonde wig, red lipstick and has a rather philosophical take on always wearing a raincoat. Do they fall in love? We do not know. But they do share interesting thoughts on people and pineapples, before she sleeps in his bed and he orders four chef’s salads. I love the way Takeshi looks here; dreamy, ethereal, and magical, a guy you would want to encounter in a shabby bar and fall in love with. His beauty stands out the most in red light, and his smile could kill (literally). But we are reluctantly forced to move on to a different story. It's Zhiwu’s eyes that convey so much more: his innocence, his desire for love, his helplessness, his refusal to let go. He is like a deer stuck at headlights. His doe eyes are scared and so full of love.

Almost instantly, we see who replaced our charming, desperate-to-belong Zhiwu - a woman who replaced his ex “May” in a shabby joint she worked at. Faye is a true maniac pixie dream girl, with impeccable music taste, who is also a stalker. But it's her eyes again, especially when they peek above her sunglasses, that do most of the talking. Her big brown eyes, creamy skin, and slender body make it impossible to hate her. She dances carelessly and flutters her big eyes when she can. However, the melody can be heard through the screen as her eyes meet Cop 663’s (Tony Leung). You can see almost instantly that she acts differently when Cop shows up; her girlish charm is most conspicuous when she compares herself to his former beau (a ravishing air hostess). You feel sorry for her endearing naivety. Our cop is no less, his eyes are the most heavenly, deep and enchanting, the ones that can drown you. He looks at Faye with such intrigue and intensity that at one point, it feels like her innocence and his allure will dance; they do for a brief moment when he rubs her legs. That is the most sensual it gets between them. He asks her out, she never shows up, his eyes yearn, and she leaves. There is a sense of loss so deeply felt here, until she comes back after a year, we see cop more in love and Faye ready for him. Their eyes meet, rather collide here, like ocean meeting the rocks this time, like they were destined for each other in this moment; you can actually see the emanating passion, the desire to risk it all, to go anywhere where destiny leads them. 

The movie is so beautiful because every emotion has a cause and a colour; every dialogue has a meaning, every action a recourse. The harshness is met with softness, especially in the Cop’s apartment, which looks so cruel but is constantly met with the softness of Faye when she visits it in his absence. This contrast is visible in so many frames, drug dealing is accompanied by Indian music, finding the missing drug dealers and constant shooting is accompanied by people doing running into ambient spaces, this makes the movie such a visual dream-fest (which obviously so many critics have said) but then again, its always the eyes of our pivotal characters and the stories they tell, the melodies they make and how they dance to it, which make this story such a cult classic. 
